docs/structures.rst, before:

=================
Structures
=================


.. currentmodule:: typedpy

.. contents:: :local:

The Basics - Usage
==================

Typedpy allows to define strict structures easily, by extending from :class:`Structure`.
A simple example:

.. code-block:: python

    from typedpy import Structure, Integer, Array, Map, Number, String, PositiveFloat

    class Example(Structure):
        name: String
        counts_by_alias: Map[String(pattern='[A-Za-z]+$'), Positive]
        num: Integer(maximum=30) = 1
        foo: Array[PositiveFloat]


 The above format is support since **Version 1.35**.

This structure validates itself, so that any attempt to create an invalid structure or mutate an instance to be invalid
will raise an exception.

This is a crucial aspect of Typedpy: For example, If you accept an instance of the Example
class above, you are **guaranteed** that "num" property exists, it is an integer, and it does not exceed 30.
If your code tries to update the instance in a way that will make num invalid according to the definition above, it will
raise an exception with the appropriate message.

Old-style :class:`Structure` definition is still supported. It looks as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    class Example(Structure):
        name = String
        counts_by_alias = Map[String(pattern='[A-Za-z]+$'), Positive]
        num = Integer(maximum=30, default=1)
        foo = Array[PositiveFloat]


* All fields are public, and fields names are not allowed to start with "_", since it implies non-public attributes.




After version 2.0, you can also use dataclass-style definition. Look at the following examples:

.. code-block:: python

   class Example_New_Style(Structure):
        name: String
        counts_by_alias: Map[String(pattern='[A-Za-z]+$'), Positive]
        num: Integer(maximum=30) = 1
        foo: Array[PositiveFloat]


    # all the types here will be automatically converted to their corresponding
    # Typedpy equivalent This includes support for PEP 585 (even on Python 3.6!)
    class Example_New_Style_Mixed_With_Typing_Types(Structure):
        name: str
        counts_by_alias: Dict[str, Positive]
        id: Union[Integer(minimum=1000), String(pattern='[0-9]+$')] = 1
        foo: Array[PositiveFloat]


    class Example_With_AutoWrapping_Of_Any_Class(Structure):
        # assume Point and Person below are arbitrary, non-Typedpy, user classes
        points: list[Point]
        person: Field[Person]

| If you look carefully, you might be confused as there are multiple ways to define similar things, for example an
| array field can be defined as Array, typing.List, list, Field[list]. What is the right one to use?
| If you use a recent version of Typepy, all of these are supported.
| However, here are some guidelines:


#. Before version 1.35 you are limited only Typedpy classes and custom extensions classes. In the example above: Array
#. Version 1.35 added Generic classes of the "typing" library, e.g. typing.List
#. Version 2.0 allows to use list, typing.List. They are converted automatically to a Typedpy :class:`Array`, thus enjoying other features of Typepy automatically.
#. After version 2.0 Typepy also supports implicit conversion of any class to a Typedpy field, thus you can use Field[list]. The disadvantage of this style is that Typedpy knows nothing about the field except its type, so serialization is done only on a best effort basis, pickling and JSON schema mapping is unsupported for any Structure with implicit mapping. Typedpy offers API to explicitly create Typedpy Field types that correspond to non-Typedpy classes, and if you don't mind the extra code, it is more flexible.
#. Wherever you can, prefer to use the Typedpy classes. They provide the richest API support and are the most rigorously tested.



.. autoclass:: Structure



.. _optional-fields:

Required Fields and Optional Fields
===================================
| By using the **_required** property in the class definition, we can define a list of fields that are required.
This means that if not all of them are provided in the instantiation, then Typedpy will raise an appropriate exception.
| By default, all the fields are required. In case it is simpler to describe the fields that are optional (for
example, we have 10 fields and only one of them is optiona), we can use the **_optional** property.
| If **_required** property is stated, the **_optional** property will be ignored.
|
| Every field that has a default value is, by definition, optional.
|
| A recent (version > 2.0.1) addition is the support of **typing.Optional** field. using Optional[MyFieldType] is
| equivalent to defining it as one of fields in the **_optional** list.
| Alternatively, you could use: AnyOf[MyFieldType, NoneField], which is the internal implementation of **Optional**
| in Typedpy.

To demonstrate, the three classes below are equivalent, as far as fields optionality:

.. code-block:: python

    class Example1(Structure):
        name: String
        val_by_alias: Map[String, Number]
        my_list: Array[PositiveFloat]
        _required = ['name', 'val_by_alias']

    class Example2(Structure):
        name: String
        val_by_alias: Map[String, Number]
        my_list: Array[PositiveFloat]
        _optional = ['my_list']

    from typing import Optional

    class Example3(Structure):
        name: String
        val_by_alias: Map[String, Number]
        my_list: Optional[Array[PositiveFloat]]

The only difference between the first two and the third is that in the third you can actually
assign **None** to my_list (i.e. instance.my_list = None), while in the others it is not allowed.


Defaults
========
| Every field can come with a default value, which implicitly makes it an optional field.
| Default values are validated like any other value in the definition of the field or class , which helps prevent
| developer's mistakes early. An invalid default will raise exception. For example, the following code raises
| a TypeError, with a clear error message:

.. code-block:: python

    class Example(Structure):
        i: Array[Integer] = [1, 2, "x"]
        s: String(default="xyz")

| As can be seen above, there are two ways to define default values: as a parameter to field constructor or
| with an equality.


Immutability
============
| Typepy supports immutable structures. Such structures are protected from any update after instantiation. In most
| cases trying to do so will raise an appropriate exception. There are cases that Typepy can't know that the developer
| is trying to change the structure, but even then, Typepy blocks such attempts by using defensive copies.
| Be aware immutable structures tend to be somewhat slower.

.. autoclass:: ImmutableStructure


Structure As Field
==================
See :ref:`structure-as-field`

Inlined Structure
=================
See :ref:`structure-inlining`

Structure Inheritance
=====================
Structure inheritance is fully supported and works the way you would expect.
Required properties are the union of all required properties.

`Here is a test for inheritance <https://github.com/loyada/typedpy/tree/master/tests/test_inheritance.py>`_

Equality Checks
===============
Equality check (i.e. checking a==b) of structures is fully supported, including for arbitrarily complex objects.

String output
=============
The string representation of structure instances shows exactly what are all the properties, even for hierarchical \
structures and arbitrarily complex ones. This is useful for debugging.

"Final" Structure
=================
Typedpy allows to define a :class:`Structure` class as a :class:`FinalStructure`. Such a class cannot be inherited.
This is useful if you want to guarantee that all instances of the class adhere to a spec, and no one changed
it by inheriting from it (for example, changed an immutable field to a mutable one.
Here is an example of usage:


.. code-block:: python

    class Trade(FinalStructure):
        instrument: ImmutableString
        # other fields

    # The following class definition will raise a TypeError with
    # the message: "FinalStructure must not be extended. Tried to extend Trade"
    class MyTrade(Trade):
        instrument: str


Ignore None Values
==================
In some use cases, it is desirable to be able to get a None value for a field, without performing
any validation (for example - mapping from a json or from a persistent model).
This can be achieved by setting every field to be AnyOf[MyField, None], but this is very verbose.
Alternatively, you can set the structure with the flag _ignore_none, as such:

.. code-block:: python

    class Foo(Structure):
        a = Integer
        s = String(default = "x")
        m = Map[String, String]
        _ignore_none = True

    foo = Foo(a=1, s = None, m = None)
    assert foo.s == "x"
    assert foo.m == None



Other Magic Methods Support
===========================
Typepy supports the following operations for structure instances:

* If your Structure is a wrapper for a collection, you can ask if an item is in it, or iterate directly over it:

.. code-block:: python

    class Foo(Structure):
        s = Map[String, Anything]
        _additionalProperties = False

    foo = Foo(s={'xxx': 123, 'yyy': 234, 'zzz': 'zzz'})
    assert 'xxx' in foo
    assert 123 not in foo
    assert [x[0] for x in foo] == ["x", "y", "z"]


* Hash functions

* Copy, deepcopy

* dir(structure_instance) returns all the field names in the instance

* pickle (with the exception of StructuredReference)

* "As boolean" operator. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    assert not Example()
    assert Example(i=5)


* cast_to - create a copy (shallow for a regular Structure, deep for ImmutableStructure) of the structure, casted
  to a given class, that must be a subclass of Structure and a subclass/superclass of the current structure.
  This is different from the standard "cast" of Python since it actually creates a shallow copy of that type.
  When you cast to a superclass, be aware that only the fields defined in the superclass will be populated.



Cloning
=======
Beyond support to the standard Python copy.copy, and copy.deepcopy, Typedpy allows to shallow clone an element
with some overrides. This is especially useful for immutable structures, the only way to generate an instance with
a different value, is to create a new instance.

Here is an example of how it works:

.. code-block:: python

    class Foo(ImmutableStructure):
        i = Integer
        s = String
        f = Float
        _additionalProperties = False

    first = Foo(i=5, s="xyz", f = 0.5)
    second = first.shallow_clone_with_overrides(i = 6)
    assert second == Foo(i=5, s="xyz", i =6)


As the name suggests, it performs a shallow copy.



Uniqueness
==========
Typedpy allows you to ensure that all the instances of a certain :class:`Structure` are unique, by
decorating it with "@unique". The uniqueness is ensured even if you updated an existing instance to match
another instance.

To illustrate:


.. code-block:: python

    @unique
    class Foo(Structure):
        s: str
        i: int

    Foo(s="xxx", i=1)
    Foo(s="xxx", i=1)   # -> raises a ValueError: Instance copy in Foo, which is defined as unique....

    Foo(s="xxx", i=2).i = 1   # raises the same ValueError as above

Beyond a threshold of 100,000 different values, this is not enforced anymore, to avoid the overhead.

Combining with "Regular" Classes
================================

Combining a structure with regular classes is straightforward.
The only thing to remember, is that if you override the constructor, it must call the super() constructor.
Example:

.. code-block:: python

    class Example(Structure):
        num = Integer(minimum=10)
        st = String

    class Foo(Example):
        def __init__(self, *args, x, y, **kwargs):
            self.x = x
            self.y = y
            super().__init__(*args, **kwargs)

        def multiply_xy_num(self):
            return self.x * self.y * self.num


    foo = Foo(st = "abc", num = 10, x = 2, y = 3)
    print(foo.multiply())
    # 60

Validating a Structure As a Whole
=================================
There are cases where we want to validate a complex field, or a structure as a whole.
For example, suppose we define a range field and we want to ensure min is not larger than max.
There are 2 ways to approach it.
First approach: create a regular class and provide a validation function, as described in :ref:`extension-of-classes`
For example:

.. code-block:: python

    class RangeCL(object):
        def __init__(self, min, max, step):
            self.min = min
            self.max = max
            self.step = step


    def validate_range(range):
        if not isinstance(range.min, (float, int, Decimal)):
            raise TypeError()
        if range.min > range.max:
            raise ValueError()

    ValidatedRangeField = create_typed_field("RangeField", RangeCL, validate_func=validate_range)

    # now we can use ValidatedRangeField as a field type. It is guaranteed to be valid.
    class Foo(Structure):
        range = ValidatedRangeField

The second approach is to override  the __validate__ function of the structure.
For example:

.. code-block:: python

    class Range(Structure):
        min = Integer
        max = Integer
        step = Integer
        _required = ["min", "max"]

        def __validate__(self):
            if self.min > self.max:
                raise ValueError("min cannot be larger than max")


In the example above, any Range instance is guaranteed to be valid, even if you mutate it.

| Of the two approaches described, usually the second approach is more elegant.

`See usage of both approaches here <https://github.com/loyada/typedpy/tree/master/tests/test_higher_order.py>`_

Alternative Syntax
==================
(starting at version 1.35)
Since many are used to the Dataclasses syntax, Typedpy supports its format for defining fields in the structure class. \
Furthermore, if provided with standard builtin types, it will convert them automatically to their equivalent Typedpy \
Field types.

So, the following class

.. code-block:: python

    class Foo(Structure):
        i: Integer = 10
        s: String(maxLength=10)
        map = Map[String, Integer]
        bar: Bar
        s1: str
        m: list = [1,2,3]

Is converted by Typedpy automatically to this:

.. code-block:: python

    class Foo(Structure):
        i = Integer(default=10)
        s = String(maxLength=10)
        map = Map[String, Integer]
        bar = Bar
        s1 = String
        m = Array(default=[1,2,3])

This provides you with all the run-time checking and other Typedpy functionality even if you use regular Python types.
It also applies default values (see fields 'm', 'i' above).

Two examples:

.. code-block:: python

    class Example1(Structure):
        i: int
        f: float
        mylist: list
        map: dict

    e = Example1(i=1, f=0.5, mylist=['x'], map={'x': 'y'})

    # the following line will throw a TypeError with the message: "mylist: Got 7; Expected <class 'list'>"
    e.mylist = 7


    class ExampleOfImmutable(ImmutableStructure):
        i: Integer = 5
        mylist: list = [1,2]
        map: dict

    e = ExampleOfImmutable(i=1, map={'x': 'y'})

    assert e.mylist == [1,2]

    # the following line will throw a ValueError with the message: "Structure is immutable"
    e.mylist.append(3)

Commit message:

doc. fixed bug in default in alternative style. 2.4.8

docs/structures.rst, after:

=================
Structures
=================


.. currentmodule:: typedpy

.. contents:: :local:

The Basics - Usage
==================

Typedpy allows to define strict structures easily, by extending from :class:`Structure`.
A simple example:

.. code-block:: python

    from typedpy import Structure, Integer, Array, Map, Number, String, PositiveFloat

    class Example(Structure):
        name: String
        counts_by_alias: Map[String(pattern='[A-Za-z]+$'), Positive]
        num: Integer(maximum=30) = 1
        foo: Array[PositiveFloat]


 The above format is support since **Version 1.35**.

This structure validates itself, so that any attempt to create an invalid structure or mutate an instance to be invalid
will raise an exception.

This is a crucial aspect of Typedpy: For example, If you accept an instance of the Example
class above, you are **guaranteed** that "num" property exists, it is an integer, and it does not exceed 30.
If your code tries to update the instance in a way that will make num invalid according to the definition above, it will
raise an exception with the appropriate message.

Old-style :class:`Structure` definition is still supported. It looks as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    class Example(Structure):
        name = String
        counts_by_alias = Map[String(pattern='[A-Za-z]+$'), Positive]
        num = Integer(maximum=30, default=1)
        foo = Array[PositiveFloat]


* All fields are public, and fields names are not allowed to start with "_", since it implies non-public attributes.




After version 2.0, you can also use dataclass-style definition. Look at the following examples:

.. code-block:: python

   class Example_New_Style(Structure):
        name: String
        counts_by_alias: Map[String(pattern='[A-Za-z]+$'), Positive]
        num: Integer(maximum=30) = 1
        foo: Array[PositiveFloat]


    # all the types here will be automatically converted to their corresponding
    # Typedpy equivalent This includes support for PEP 585 (even on Python 3.6!)
    class Example_New_Style_Mixed_With_Typing_Types(Structure):
        name: str
        counts_by_alias: Dict[str, Positive]
        id: Union[Integer(minimum=1000), String(pattern='[0-9]+$')] = 1
        foo: Array[PositiveFloat]


    class Example_With_AutoWrapping_Of_Any_Class(Structure):
        # assume Point and Person below are arbitrary, non-Typedpy, user classes
        points: list[Point]
        person: Field[Person]

| If you look carefully, you might be confused as there are multiple ways to define similar things, for example an
| array field can be defined as Array, typing.List, list, Field[list]. What is the right one to use?
| If you use a recent version of Typepy, all of these are supported.
| However, here are some guidelines:


#. Before version 1.35 you are limited only Typedpy classes and custom extensions classes. In the example above: Array
#. Version 1.35 added Generic classes of the "typing" library, e.g. typing.List
#. Version 2.0 allows to use list, typing.List. They are converted automatically to a Typedpy :class:`Array`, thus enjoying other features of Typepy automatically.
#. After version 2.0 Typepy also supports implicit conversion of any class to a Typedpy field, thus you can use Field[list]. The disadvantage of this style is that Typedpy knows nothing about the field except its type, so serialization is done only on a best effort basis, pickling and JSON schema mapping is unsupported for any Structure with implicit mapping. Typedpy offers API to explicitly create Typedpy Field types that correspond to non-Typedpy classes, and if you don't mind the extra code, it is more flexible.
#. Wherever you can, prefer to use the Typedpy classes. They provide the richest API support and are the most rigorously tested.



.. autoclass:: Structure



.. _optional-fields:

Required Fields and Optional Fields
===================================
| By using the **_required** property in the class definition, we can define a list of fields that are required.
This means that if not all of them are provided in the instantiation, then Typedpy will raise an appropriate exception.
| By default, all the fields are required. In case it is simpler to describe the fields that are optional (for
example, we have 10 fields and only one of them is optiona), we can use the **_optional** property.
| If **_required** property is stated, the **_optional** property will be ignored.
|
| Every field that has a default value is, by definition, optional.
|
| A recent (version > 2.0.1) addition is the support of **typing.Optional** field. using Optional[MyFieldType] is
| equivalent to defining it as one of fields in the **_optional** list.
| Alternatively, you could use: AnyOf[MyFieldType, NoneField], which is the internal implementation of **Optional**
| in Typedpy.

To demonstrate, the three classes below are equivalent, as far as fields optionality:

.. code-block:: python

    class Example1(Structure):
        name: String
        val_by_alias: Map[String, Number]
        my_list: Array[PositiveFloat]
        _required = ['name', 'val_by_alias']

    class Example2(Structure):
        name: String
        val_by_alias: Map[String, Number]
        my_list: Array[PositiveFloat]
        _optional = ['my_list']

    from typing import Optional

    class Example3(Structure):
        name: String
        val_by_alias: Map[String, Number]
        my_list: Optional[Array[PositiveFloat]]

The only difference between the first two and the third is that in the third you can actually
assign **None** to my_list (i.e. instance.my_list = None), while in the others it is not allowed.


Defaults
========
| Every field can come with a default value, which implicitly makes it an optional field.
| Default values are validated like any other value in the definition of the field or class , which helps prevent
| developer's mistakes early. An invalid default will raise exception. For example, the following code raises
| a TypeError, with a clear error message:

.. code-block:: python

    class Example(Structure):
        i: Array[Integer] = [1, 2, "x"]
        s: String(default="xyz")

| As can be seen above, there are two ways to define default values: as a parameter to field constructor or
| with an equality.


| In general, developers are strongly encouraged not to use mutable values as defaults, since it means the default
| can be updated. Instead, you can use a factory function. For example:


.. code-block:: python

    def default_factory(): return [1,2,3]

    class Example(Structure):
        i: Array[Integer] = default_factory

Immutability
============
| Typepy supports immutable structures. Such structures are protected from any update after instantiation. In most
| cases trying to do so will raise an appropriate exception. There are cases that Typepy can't know that the developer
| is trying to change the structure, but even then, Typepy blocks such attempts by using defensive copies.
| Be aware immutable structures tend to be somewhat slower.

.. autoclass:: ImmutableStructure


Structure As Field
==================
See :ref:`structure-as-field`

Inlined Structure
=================
See :ref:`structure-inlining`

Structure Inheritance
=====================
Structure inheritance is fully supported and works the way you would expect.
Required properties are the union of all required properties.

`Here is a test for inheritance <https://github.com/loyada/typedpy/tree/master/tests/test_inheritance.py>`_

Equality Checks
===============
Equality check (i.e. checking a==b) of structures is fully supported, including for arbitrarily complex objects.

String output
=============
The string representation of structure instances shows exactly what are all the properties, even for hierarchical \
structures and arbitrarily complex ones. This is useful for debugging.

"Final" Structure
=================
Typedpy allows to define a :class:`Structure` class as a :class:`FinalStructure`. Such a class cannot be inherited.
This is useful if you want to guarantee that all instances of the class adhere to a spec, and no one changed
it by inheriting from it (for example, changed an immutable field to a mutable one.
Here is an example of usage:


.. code-block:: python

    class Trade(FinalStructure):
        instrument: ImmutableString
        # other fields

    # The following class definition will raise a TypeError with
    # the message: "FinalStructure must not be extended. Tried to extend Trade"
    class MyTrade(Trade):
        instrument: str


Ignore None Values
==================
In some use cases, it is desirable to be able to get a None value for a field, without performing
any validation (for example - mapping from a json or from a persistent model).
This can be achieved by setting every field to be AnyOf[MyField, None], but this is very verbose.
Alternatively, you can set the structure with the flag _ignore_none, as such:

.. code-block:: python

    class Foo(Structure):
        a = Integer
        s = String(default = "x")
        m = Map[String, String]
        _ignore_none = True

    foo = Foo(a=1, s = None, m = None)
    assert foo.s == "x"
    assert foo.m == None



Other Magic Methods Support
===========================
Typepy supports the following operations for structure instances:

* If your Structure is a wrapper for a collection, you can ask if an item is in it, or iterate directly over it:

.. code-block:: python

    class Foo(Structure):
        s = Map[String, Anything]
        _additionalProperties = False

    foo = Foo(s={'xxx': 123, 'yyy': 234, 'zzz': 'zzz'})
    assert 'xxx' in foo
    assert 123 not in foo
    assert [x[0] for x in foo] == ["x", "y", "z"]


* Hash functions

* Copy, deepcopy

* dir(structure_instance) returns all the field names in the instance

* pickle (with the exception of StructuredReference)

* "As boolean" operator. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    assert not Example()
    assert Example(i=5)


* cast_to - create a copy (shallow for a regular Structure, deep for ImmutableStructure) of the structure, casted
  to a given class, that must be a subclass of Structure and a subclass/superclass of the current structure.
  This is different from the standard "cast" of Python since it actually creates a shallow copy of that type.
  When you cast to a superclass, be aware that only the fields defined in the superclass will be populated.



Cloning
=======
Beyond support to the standard Python copy.copy, and copy.deepcopy, Typedpy allows to shallow clone an element
with some overrides. This is especially useful for immutable structures, the only way to generate an instance with
a different value, is to create a new instance.

Here is an example of how it works:

.. code-block:: python

    class Foo(ImmutableStructure):
        i = Integer
        s = String
        f = Float
        _additionalProperties = False

    first = Foo(i=5, s="xyz", f = 0.5)
    second = first.shallow_clone_with_overrides(i = 6)
    assert second == Foo(i=5, s="xyz", i =6)


As the name suggests, it performs a shallow copy.



Uniqueness
==========
Typedpy allows you to ensure that all the instances of a certain :class:`Structure` are unique, by
decorating it with "@unique". The uniqueness is ensured even if you updated an existing instance to match
another instance.

To illustrate:


.. code-block:: python

    @unique
    class Foo(Structure):
        s: str
        i: int

    Foo(s="xxx", i=1)
    Foo(s="xxx", i=1)   # -> raises a ValueError: Instance copy in Foo, which is defined as unique....

    Foo(s="xxx", i=2).i = 1   # raises the same ValueError as above

Beyond a threshold of 100,000 different values, this is not enforced anymore, to avoid the overhead.

Combining with "Regular" Classes
================================

Combining a structure with regular classes is straightforward.
The only thing to remember, is that if you override the constructor, it must call the super() constructor.
Example:

.. code-block:: python

    class Example(Structure):
        num = Integer(minimum=10)
        st = String

    class Foo(Example):
        def __init__(self, *args, x, y, **kwargs):
            self.x = x
            self.y = y
            super().__init__(*args, **kwargs)

        def multiply_xy_num(self):
            return self.x * self.y * self.num


    foo = Foo(st = "abc", num = 10, x = 2, y = 3)
    print(foo.multiply())
    # 60

Validating a Structure As a Whole
=================================
There are cases where we want to validate a complex field, or a structure as a whole.
For example, suppose we define a range field and we want to ensure min is not larger than max.
There are 2 ways to approach it.
First approach: create a regular class and provide a validation function, as described in :ref:`extension-of-classes`
For example:

.. code-block:: python

    class RangeCL(object):
        def __init__(self, min, max, step):
            self.min = min
            self.max = max
            self.step = step


    def validate_range(range):
        if not isinstance(range.min, (float, int, Decimal)):
            raise TypeError()
        if range.min > range.max:
            raise ValueError()

    ValidatedRangeField = create_typed_field("RangeField", RangeCL, validate_func=validate_range)

    # now we can use ValidatedRangeField as a field type. It is guaranteed to be valid.
    class Foo(Structure):
        range = ValidatedRangeField

The second approach is to override  the __validate__ function of the structure.
For example:

.. code-block:: python

    class Range(Structure):
        min = Integer
        max = Integer
        step = Integer
        _required = ["min", "max"]

        def __validate__(self):
            if self.min > self.max:
                raise ValueError("min cannot be larger than max")


In the example above, any Range instance is guaranteed to be valid, even if you mutate it.

| Of the two approaches described, usually the second approach is more elegant.

`See usage of both approaches here <https://github.com/loyada/typedpy/tree/master/tests/test_higher_order.py>`_

Alternative Syntax
==================
(starting at version 1.35)
Since many are used to the Dataclasses syntax, Typedpy supports its format for defining fields in the structure class. \
Furthermore, if provided with standard builtin types, it will convert them automatically to their equivalent Typedpy \
Field types.

So, the following class

.. code-block:: python

    class Foo(Structure):
        i: Integer = 10
        s: String(maxLength=10)
        map = Map[String, Integer]
        bar: Bar
        s1: str
        m: list = [1,2,3]

Is converted by Typedpy automatically to this:

.. code-block:: python

    class Foo(Structure):
        i = Integer(default=10)
        s = String(maxLength=10)
        map = Map[String, Integer]
        bar = Bar
        s1 = String
        m = Array(default=[1,2,3])

This provides you with all the run-time checking and other Typedpy functionality even if you use regular Python types.
It also applies default values (see fields 'm', 'i' above).

Two examples:

.. code-block:: python

    class Example1(Structure):
        i: int
        f: float
        mylist: list
        map: dict

    e = Example1(i=1, f=0.5, mylist=['x'], map={'x': 'y'})

    # the following line will throw a TypeError with the message: "mylist: Got 7; Expected <class 'list'>"
    e.mylist = 7


    class ExampleOfImmutable(ImmutableStructure):
        i: Integer = 5
        mylist: list = [1,2]
        map: dict

    e = ExampleOfImmutable(i=1, map={'x': 'y'})

    assert e.mylist == [1,2]

    # the following line will throw a ValueError with the message: "Structure is immutable"
    e.mylist.append(3)
